# Merkle ledgers

- OCaml sources:
  - interfaces
    - [Base_inputs_intf](base_inputs_intf.ml): basic inputs to ledger-making
      functors
    - [Base_ledger_intf](base_ledger_intf.ml): interface all ledgers support
    - [Database_intf](database_intf.ml): interface for ledgers using a database,
      includes `Base_ledger_intf`
    - [Intf](intf.ml): interface for modules referred-to in ledger code (`Key`,
      etc.)
    - [Ledger_extras_intf](ledger_extras_intf.ml): additional ledger
      functionality, includes `Merkle_ledger_intf`
    - [Location_intf](location_intf.ml): interface for the location abstraction
  - [Merkle_ledger_intf](merkle_ledger_intf.ml): the interface for ledgers
    - [Syncable_intf](syncable_intf.ml): interface for Merkle ledgers that can
      be sync'ed to another ledger, included in `Base_ledger_intf`

  - implementations
    - [Any_ledger](any_ledger.ml): dispatch function calls to arbitrary module
      implementing a ledger
    - [Database](database.ml): implementation of a database-backed ledger
    - [Graphviz](graphviz.ml): visualization of Merkle ledgers
    - [Location](location.ml): location abstraction
    - [Merkle_path](merkle_path.ml): path through Merkle tree, to prove leaf
      membership
    - [Null_ledger](null_ledger.ml): ledger with no accounts to serve as a
      placeholder
    - [Util](util.ml): additional ledger-related functions (via a functor)

A Merkle ledger is essentially a binary tree with a fixed depth, whose leaves
contain account data. Each node in the tree has an associated hash and from
those node hashes, a Merkle root can be computed. Ledgers also maintain some
bookkeeping data stored outside the binary tree. In Mina, there are several
implementations of the ledger data structure, with some common features.

The basic interface for ledgers is in `Base_ledger_intf.ml`. The items below
help to explain some of the types and terminology mentioned there.

## Uuids

Each ledger has a unique identifier, to distinguish it from other ledgers. There
is no functional significance for a UUID, other than to aid in debugging.

## Accounts and account ids

An account is a user account, containing a user's public key, balance, and other
information. Accounts can be denominated in Mina tokens, or another token that's
been minted. A user with a particular public key can have distinct accounts
denominated in different tokens.

An account id denotes an account with a particular public key and token. Both
items are needed to lookup an account in the ledger.

## Merkle addresses, locations, indexes, directories

The Merkle address of a node is a bitstring describing the path from the root of
the binary tree to that node. The address of the root is the empty string. A 0
bit denotes choosing the left subtree, a 1 chooses the right subtree.

An account is stored at a particular location in a ledger. Locations can also
denote hashes at interior nodes. For accounts and hashes, a location contains an
address. A location can also denote where bookkeeping state information is
stored, unrelated to the binary tree as such.

Besides locations, each account in a ledger has a distinct index, which is an
integer. Indexes are a 0-based integer indicating the leaf order in the ledger's
binary tree.

Some ledger implementations may rely on a file system, with an associated notion
of directories.

## Merkle paths and roots

The Merkle root is the hash at the root of the binary tree, computed by
combining hashes from all nodes in the tree. Hashes are combined using the
function `Mina_base.Ledger_hash.merge`. There's a table that "salts" the hash
computation for each level of the binary tree.

A Merkle path is a path from a location or index, to the root of the binary tree
that represents a ledger. Such a path consists of edges labeled `Left` or
`Right`, and denotes the nodes in the binary whose hashes are needed to compute
the Merkle root, given the hash of the node at the location or index. The first
element of the path is the sibling of the node at the location or index. Such a
path is sometimes called a Merkle proof.
