README.md, before:

<a href="https://minaprotocol.com">
  <img src="https://github.com/MinaProtocol/docs/blob/main/public/static/img/svg/mina-wordmark-redviolet.svg?raw=true&sanitize=true" width="350" alt="Mina logo">
</a>

# Mina

Mina is the first cryptocurrency with a lightweight, constant-sized blockchain. This is the main source code repository for the Mina project. It contains code for the OCaml protocol implementation, [website](https://minaprotocol.com), & wallet. Enjoy!

## Notes

- Mina is still under active development, and APIs are still evolving. If you do build upon the APIs, be aware that breaking changes may occur.

## What is Mina?

### Mina Walkthrough

- [Docs](https://minaprotocol.com/docs/)
- [My First Transaction](https://minaprotocol.com/docs/my-first-transaction/)
- [Become a Node Operator](https://minaprotocol.com/docs/getting-started/)

### Technical Papers

- [Mina Whitepaper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/352.pdf)

### Blog

- [Mina Protocol Blog](https://minaprotocol.com/blog.html)

## Contributing

Read the [Contributing Guide](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/en/developers/contributing) for information on how to make both technical and non-technical contributions.

## Developers

The [Developer docs](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/en/developers) contain all the information needed to begin contributing code to Mina, and using Mina APIs to build applications.

#### Quick Links:

- [Developer README](README-dev.md)
- [Running a demo node](docs/demo.md)
- [Lifecycle of a payment](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/en/architecture/lifecycle-payment)

## Community

- Join the public [Discord server](https://bit.ly/MinaDiscord)! Please come by if you need help or have any questions.
- Get the latest updates by [signing up for the Mina newsletter](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdChigoRhyZqg1RbaA6ODiqJ4q42cPpNbSH-koxXHjLwDeqDw/viewform?usp=pp_url&entry.2026041782=I+just+want+to+learn+more!).

## License

[Apache 2.0](LICENSE)

Commits older than 2018-10-03 do not have a [LICENSE](LICENSE) file or this notice, but are distributed under the same terms.

Commit message:

Added Zenhub boards to README.md

README.md, after:

<a href="https://minaprotocol.com">
  <img src="https://github.com/MinaProtocol/docs/blob/main/public/static/img/svg/mina-wordmark-redviolet.svg?raw=true&sanitize=true" width="350" alt="Mina logo">
</a>

# Mina

Mina is the first cryptocurrency with a lightweight, constant-sized blockchain. This is the main source code repository for the Mina project. It contains code for the OCaml protocol implementation, [website](https://minaprotocol.com), & wallet. Enjoy!

## Notes

- Mina is still under active development, and APIs are still evolving. If you do build upon the APIs, be aware that breaking changes may occur.

## What is Mina?

### Mina Walkthrough

- [Docs](https://minaprotocol.com/docs/)
- [My First Transaction](https://minaprotocol.com/docs/my-first-transaction/)
- [Become a Node Operator](https://minaprotocol.com/docs/getting-started/)

### Technical Papers

- [Mina Whitepaper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/352.pdf)

### Blog

- [Mina Protocol Blog](https://minaprotocol.com/blog.html)

## Contributing

Read the [Contributing Guide](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/en/developers/contributing) for information on how to make both technical and non-technical contributions.

## Developers

The [Developer docs](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/en/developers) contain all the information needed to begin contributing code to Mina, and using Mina APIs to build applications.

#### Quick Links:

- [Developer README](README-dev.md)
- [Running a demo node](docs/demo.md)
- [Lifecycle of a payment](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/en/architecture/lifecycle-payment)

## Community

- Join the public [Discord server](https://bit.ly/MinaDiscord)! Please come by if you need help or have any questions.
- Get the latest updates by [signing up for the Mina newsletter](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdChigoRhyZqg1RbaA6ODiqJ4q42cPpNbSH-koxXHjLwDeqDw/viewform?usp=pp_url&entry.2026041782=I+just+want+to+learn+more!).

## Follow our work

We use Zenhub to track our tasks and get metrics about our team's efforts. Zenhub is a third-party product that adds an abstraction layer with more functionalities on top of Github. You can follow our work in the following boards:

- [zkApps](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/unified-zkapp-6244b2acba5b64001dfe6ba6/board)
- [Core Crypto](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/core-crypto-621fcb82b7d49700156fd060/board)
- [Velocity](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/velocity-62264fddc441a100183f7f86/board)
- [Network Stability](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/network-stability-6205823c982b610013c514cd/board)
- [Product](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/o1-product-61fc1ed4aeb5be00144a555c/board)
- [Rosetta](https://app.zenhub.com/workspaces/rosetta-62546aa5cb3db30019d602c5/board)

## License

[Apache 2.0](LICENSE)

Commits older than 2018-10-03 do not have a [LICENSE](LICENSE) file or this notice, but are distributed under the same terms.
