# PR 16831: Move plonk_wasm into proof-systems

## Summary

This patch is part of the migration effort to consolidate the Rust code for WASM
bindings (plonk_wasm) into the proof-systems repository. The changes remove the
entire plonk_wasm crate and its associated configuration files, documentation,
and source modules.
It is a follow-up on [16820](./16820.md).

It goes with the following counterpart in proof-systems:
https://github.com/o1-labs/proof-systems/pull/3129

## Changes

- Removal of WASM glue code and related Rust modules.
- Deletion of configuration files (Cargo.toml, .cargo/config.toml,
  rust-toolchain.toml, etc.) and documentation (README.md) for the plonk_wasm
  crate.
- Preparing for dependency and version management to be handled on the
  proof-systems side.

## Impact

This change aims to simplify the developer experience by centralizing dependency
management, consolidating the Rust codebase, and encouraging consistent Rust practices
across the previously scattered components now unified under a single repository.

In addition, o1js contributors have to move their Rust/WebAssembly contributions
in the proof-systems repository, and update Mina and o1js/o1js-bindings
accordingly as recommended in the documentation.

In particular, this patch will unify the version of wasm-bindgen used across the
whole Mina/o1js codebase. From now, changing the version of wasm-bindgen should
be restricted to:
1. Updating wasm-bindgen in
   `src/lib/crypto/kimchi_bindings/proof-systems/Cargo.toml`
2. Updating wasm-bindgen-test in
   `src/lib/crypto/kimchi_bindings/proof-systems/Cargo.toml` to the version
   corresponding to the version of wasm-bindgen selected previously.
3. Generate the file `Cargo.lock`.
4. Updating the different repositories Mina, o1js and o1js-bindings as usual
   after submitting a patch updating the submodule `proof-systems` in the Mina
   codebase.
