frontend/website/pages/docs/developers/sandbox-node.mdx, before:

import Page from "@reason/pages/Docs";
export default Page({ title: "Sandbox Node" });

# Sandbox Node

The Coda Sandbox Node will enable you to test and get familiar with core features of the protocol and build tooling in a stable environment -- it's a single-node private network that uses the same configuration as the live testnet. This sandbox supports multiple accounts, sending transactions between them, and will also support performing SNARK work, delegating, and staking. In fact since it's a single node network, you'll get all the block rewards!

<Alert>

The sandbox does **NOT** connect you to a live network.

</Alert>

## Installation

[Docker](https://www.docker.com) is a tool for portably running applications. The Coda Sandbox Node is packaged with Docker. It’s easy to install--we suggest the [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop).

After you have Docker installed run the following command to spin up the Coda Sandbox.

```
docker run \
  --publish 3085:3085 \
  -d \
  --name coda \
  codaprotocol/coda-demo:sandbox-32a.1
```

This command will start a daemon inside the docker container and expose the GraphQL port (3085), which is used for communication with the client, to your computer. This daemon will automatically be running in the background with a block producer and snark worker.

You can view logs by executing.

```
docker logs --follow coda
```

And stop coda by running.

```
docker stop coda
```

You can use the Coda CLI to interact with the sandbox node. The following command opens a shell inside the docker container from where you can issue any of the available [coda commands](/docs/cli-reference).

```
docker exec -it coda bash
```

### Account details

The container has one account with this public key:

```
B62qrPN5Y5yq8kGE3FbVKbGTdTAJNdtNtB5sNVpxyRwWGcDEhpMzc8g
```

The password for this account is the empty string (there's no password -- you can leave the password field blank).

## How to use the sandbox

There are a few things you can do with your sandbox now that you have it running:

- [Install Coda](/docs/getting-started#installation) as usual and use many of the client commands. Since the daemon is already running in the container, you don't need to run `coda daemon`!

- Install the [GUI Wallet](/docs/gui-wallet) app to use a graphical interface to your node. Enter '127.0.0.1' as the host of your node during setup.

- Head over to http://localhost:3085/graphql to play with the GraphQL API directly.

Commit message:

Updates sandbox page for pickles

frontend/website/pages/docs/developers/sandbox-node.mdx, after:

import Page from "@reason/pages/Docs";
export default Page({ title: "Sandbox Node" });

# Sandbox Node

The Coda Sandbox Node will enable you to test and get familiar with core features of the protocol and build tooling in a stable environment -- it's a single-node private network that uses the same configuration as the live testnet. This sandbox supports multiple accounts, sending transactions between them, and will also support performing SNARK work, delegating, and staking. In fact since it's a single node network, you'll get all the block rewards!

<Alert>

The sandbox does **NOT** connect you to a live network.

</Alert>

## Installation

[Docker](https://www.docker.com) is a tool for portably running applications. The Coda Sandbox Node is packaged with Docker. It’s easy to install--we suggest the [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop).

After you have Docker installed run the following command to spin up the Coda Sandbox.

```
docker run \
  --publish 3085:3085 \
  -d \
  --name coda \
  codaprotocol/coda-demo:pickles-sandbox
```

This command will start a daemon inside the docker container and expose the GraphQL port (3085), which is used for communication with the client, to your computer. This daemon will automatically be running in the background with a block producer and snark worker.

You can view logs by executing.

```
docker logs --follow coda
```

And stop coda by running.

```
docker stop coda
```

You can use the Coda CLI to interact with the sandbox node. The following command opens a shell inside the docker container from where you can issue any of the available [coda commands](/docs/cli-reference).

```
docker exec -it coda bash
```

### Account details

The container has one account with this public key:

```
B62qrPN5Y5yq8kGE3FbVKbGTdTAJNdtNtB5sNVpxyRwWGcDEhpMzc8g
```

The password for this account is the empty string (there's no password -- you can leave the password field blank).

## How to use the sandbox

There are a few things you can do with your sandbox now that you have it running:

- Follow [the normal instructions](https://codaprotocol.com/docs/my-first-transaction#create-a-new-account) skipping over those steps that interact with a live network such as using a faucet.

- Head over to http://localhost:3085/graphql to play with the GraphQL API directly.

- Observe the logs and marvel at all the interesting crypto executing on your machine.
