docs/style_guide.md, before:

# Style Guidelines

## Ocaml
[ocaml]: #ocaml

### General
[ocaml-general]: #ocaml-general

Our style guidelines are an extension of a couple of existing style guidelines. The first is ocamlformat, and it acts as the source of truth for most of our coding style. In fact, ocamlformat is a blocker on CI, so your code must be formated by it's guidelines in order to be merged into master. Ocamlformat does not handle all important cases of style, however, as it is only defining and enforcing how code should be spaced out and indented. For anything which ocamlformat does not cover, the [janestreet styleguide](https://opensource.janestreet.com/standards/) should be referenced. This styleguide we define here is intended to be an extension of the janestreet styleguide, with more attention to detail in concern to a few specific constructs we use regularly throughout our codebase.

### Mli Files
[ocaml-mli]: #ocaml-mli

A `*.mli` file should not be included for a `*.ml` file iff the `*.ml` file's automatically derived interface is different. Many `*.ml` files in our codebase consist of only signatures and a functor. In the case of those files, there is not purpose to redefining the `*.mli` file because there is no new or restricted information in that file. If a `*.ml` file contains implementations in the root structure, then a `*.mli` file should most likely be created.

### Modules
[ocaml-modules]: #ocaml-modules

#### Prefer Standardized Shortnames

The names `t`, `T`, and `S` are common shortnames used in modules to signify specific things.

The name `t` is used to represent the root type of a module. For instance, if there is a module `Account` which contains types and values related to accounts, then `Account.t` is the type of an account. The name `t` can also be used as a value iff there is only intended to be one value of the root type of the module. As an example, if you wanted to have a single global logger in a `Logger` module, the type `Logger.t` could be the type of a logger, and the value `Logger.t` could be the global logger value of type `Logger.t`.

The module name `T` is used to encapsulate the root type and basic definitions regarding a root type of a module. It is a common practice used when you want to instantiate some functors for a module's root type and have the instantiations appear in the module itself. As an example, it is common to call the `Comparable.Make` functor in order to derive various helper values/modules from a comparable type. In this case, if we had a module `Account` again, and we wanted to derive the `Comparable.S` signature, then we would define a module `T` in `Account` which defines a root type `t` and the required functions for the `Comparable.Make` functor argument (in this case, `compare`). With this `T` module, we can then `include T` and `include Comparable.Make (T)` in the `Account` module to bring in all related values/modules for the `Account.t` type. Here is a full example of that:

```
module Account = struct
  module T = struct
    type t = ... [@@deriving compare]
  end

  include T
  include Comparable.Make (T)
end
```

The module type name `S` is used for defining the root signature of a module. This is most commonly used when you have a module which contains a functor. In this case, we typically call the functor `Make` and declare the functor returns the type `S`, putting both of these values in the same module. Looking back at our previous example, `Core_kernel`'s `Comparable` module follows this pattern: `Comparable.Make` is a functor which returns a `Comparable.S`.

#### Prefer One Type Per Module
[ocaml-modules-singleton-types]: #ocaml-modules-singleton-types

As a general rule of thumb, each module should be scoped to a single type. This pattern helps isolate concerns and, in turn, allows value names to be shorter, as they are located by context. Take, for example, a `Merkle_tree` module. This module will need a type `Merkle_tree.t` which represents the entire merkle tree (or a node of it). A `Merkle_tree` will also want to have a `path` type. It is preferable to place this `path` type into it's own nested module (`Merkle_tree.Path.t` instead of `Merkle_tree.path`). To help understand why this is preferable, imagine we did put path in `Merkle_tree.path`. Now, `Merkle_tree` contains values (functions) that relate not only to the merkle tree type itself, but also the a path of a merkle tree. For clarity, it would be natural to prepend all of the value names related to a path with `path_` (`path_map`, `path_length`, etc...). By isolating `Path` to it's own module, we can shorten these names while keep the context of values clear. Additionally, if we choose to in the future, we may encapsulate the implementation details of `Path` by applying a restrictive signature to it, which would make the separation of concerns more clear via compiler enforcement.

#### No Monkeypatching
[ocaml-modules-monkeypatching]: #ocaml-modules-monkeypatching

Monkeypatching of modules is explicity disallowed in our codebase. Monkeypatching is defined as the act of taking an existing module and redefining it with extended or modified values. More simply, it's anything of the form.

```
module A = struct
  module M = struct
    let x = ...
  end
end

module M = struct
  include A.M
  let y = ...
  (* or `let x = ...` *)
end
```

Monkeypatching may be the easiest path to getting code to compile sometimes, but in general, it creates confusion and/or technical debt in the codebase. If you need to monkeypatch a module, you should have a good reason as to why.

#### Functor Signature Equalities
[ocaml-modules-functor-patterns]: #ocaml-modules-functor-patterns

Signature `with` statements for signatures of modules generated by functors should be limited to the form `S with module M1 = M2` whenever possible. Replacement equalities `:=` should be limited to `include` statements where portions of the signature need to be limited (for example, when a nested module in the signature is already defined at the current structure scope). The form `S with type t = ...` is also not preferred as it scales poorly as the number of common dependencies between signatures involved with a functor increases. Note that this places increased importance on the janestreet styleguide rule "Prefer standard signature includes to hand-written interfaces".

#### Functor Arity
[ocaml-modules-functor-arity]: #ocaml-modules-functor-arity

Functor can have a maximum arity of 3 (arity is the number of arguments; in this case, the number of nested functors - functors returning functors). If a functor requires more than 3 modules as arguments, then the required modules should all be nested into one module. The standard pattern for this is to define a signature `Inputs_intf` for your functor, which will, in turn, define the module arguments to the functor. See below for a simple example.

```
module type Inputs_intf = sig
  module A : A.S
  module B : B.S
  module C : C.S
  module D : D.S
end

module type S = sig
  include Inputs_intf

  (* ... *)
end

module Make (Inputs : Inputs_intf)
  : S
    with module A = Inputs.A
     and module B = Inputs.B
     and module C = Inputs.C
     and module D = Inputs.D =
struct
  open Inputs

  (* ... *)
end
```

# Code Idiosyncrasies

We use a particular style of OCaml. Here's some of the important things.

<a name="parameterized-records"></a>
## Parameterized records

```ocaml
type ('payload, 'pk, 'signature) t_ =
  {payload: 'payload; sender: 'pk; signature: 'signature}
[@@deriving eq, sexp, hash]

type t = (Payload.t, Public_key.t, Signature.t) t_
[@@deriving eq, sexp, hash]

(* ... *)

type var = (Payload.var, Public_key.var, Signature.var) t_
```

We're defining a base type `t_` with type variables for all types of record fields. Then we define the record using these type variables. Finally, we instantiate the record with `type t`, this is the OCaml type. And also `type var` this is the type of this value in a SNARK circuit. We'll cover this more later. Whenever we want something to be programmable from within a SNARK circuit we define it in this manner so we can reuse the record definition across both types.

There is some talk of moving to OCaml object types to do this sort of thing so we don't need to deal with positional arguments. Perhaps I (@bkase) will write up an RFC for that at some point.

<a name="ppx_deriving"></a>
### Ppx_deriving

```ocaml
type t = int [@@deriving sexp, eq]
```

This is the first time we've seen a macro. Here we use `sexp` from [ppx_jane](https://github.com/janestreet/ppx_jane) and `eq` from [ppx_deriving](https://github.com/ocaml-ppx/ppx_deriving).


<a name="stable-v1"></a>
### Stable.V1

```ocaml
module Stable : sig
  module V1 : sig
    type t = (* ... *)
    [@@deriving bin_io, (*...*)]
  end
end
```

Whenever a type is serializable, it's important for us to maintain backwards compatibility once we have a stable release. Ideally, we wouldn't define `bin_io` on any types outside of `Stable.V1`. When we change the structure of the datatype we would create a `V2` under `Stable`.

<a name="quickcheck-gen"></a>
### Property based tests

[Core](https://opensource.janestreet.com/core/) has an implementation of [QuickCheck](https://blog.janestreet.com/quickcheck-for-core/) that we use whenever we can in unit tests. Here is an example signature for a `Quickcheck.Generator.t` of payments.

```ocaml
(* Generate a single payment between
 * $a, b \in keys$
 * for fee $\in [0,max_fee]$
 * and an amount $\in [1,max_amount]$
 *)

val gen :
     keys:Signature_keypair.t array
  -> max_amount:int
  -> max_fee:int
  -> t Quickcheck.Generator.t
```

<a name="typesafe-invariants"></a>
### Typesafe invariants (help with naming this section)

Often times in Coda, we need to perform very important checks on certain pieces of data.
For example, we need to confirm that the signature is valid on a user-command we receive over the network.
Such checks can be expensive, so we only want to do them once, but we want to remember that we've done them.

```ocaml
(* inside user_command.mli *)

module With_valid_signature : sig
  type nonrec t = private t [@@deriving sexp, eq]

  (*...*)
end

val check : t -> With_valid_signature.t option
```

Here we define `With_valid_signature` (usage will be `User_command.With_valid_signature.t`) using `type nonrec t = private t` to allow upcasting to a `User_command.t`, but prevent downcasting. The _only_ way to turn a `User_command.t` into a `User_command.With_valid_signature.t` is to `check` it. Now the compiler will catch our mistakes.

<a name="unit-tests"></a>
### Unit Tests

We use [ppx_inline_test](https://github.com/janestreet/ppx_inline_test) for unit testing. Of course whenever we can, we combine that with `QuickCheck`.

```ocaml
let%test_unit =
  Quickcheck.test ~sexp:[%sexp_of: Int.t] Int.gen
    ~f:(fun x -> assert (Int.equal (f_inv (f x)) x))
```

<a name="functors"></a>
### Functors

We are in the process of migrating to using module signature equalities -- see [the above section](#functor-signature-equalities) and [the rfc for rationale](../rfcs/0004-style-guidelines.md), but we still have a lot of code using type substitutions (`with type foo := bar`).

In [signature_lib/checked.ml](../src/lib/signature_lib/checked.ml) we have an example of a definition using type substitutions. First we define the resulting module type of the functor, keeping all types we'll be functoring in abstract.

```ocaml
module type S = sig
  type boolean_var
  type curve
  type curve_var
  (*...*)
end
```

Then we define the functor:

```ocaml
module Schnorr
  (Impl : Snark_intf.S)
  (Curve : sig (*...*) end)
  (Message : Message_intf
    with type boolean_var := Impl.Boolean.var
    (*...*))
: S with type boolean_var := Impl.Boolean.var
     and type curve := Curve.t
     and type curve_var := Curve.var
     (*...*)
= struct
  (* here we implement the signature described in S *)
end
```

<a name="snark-checked"></a>
### Custom SNARK circuit logic

This is also the first time we see custom SNARK circuit logic. A pattern we've been using is to scope all operations that you'd want to run inside a SNARK under a submodule `module Checked`.

For example, inside [sgn.mli](../src/lib/sgn/sgn.mli) we see:

```ocaml
(* ... *)
val negate : t -> t

module Checked : sig
  val negate : var -> var
end
```

`negate` is the version of the function that runs in OCaml, and `Checked.negate` is the one that runs inside of a SNARK circuit.

Commit message:

fix word re mli files; add section of polymorphic variants

docs/style_guide.md, after:

# Style Guidelines

## Ocaml
[ocaml]: #ocaml

### General
[ocaml-general]: #ocaml-general

Our style guidelines are an extension of a couple of existing style guidelines. The first is ocamlformat, and it acts as the source of truth for most of our coding style. In fact, ocamlformat is a blocker on CI, so your code must be formated by it's guidelines in order to be merged into master. Ocamlformat does not handle all important cases of style, however, as it is only defining and enforcing how code should be spaced out and indented. For anything which ocamlformat does not cover, the [janestreet styleguide](https://opensource.janestreet.com/standards/) should be referenced. This styleguide we define here is intended to be an extension of the janestreet styleguide, with more attention to detail in concern to a few specific constructs we use regularly throughout our codebase.

### Mli Files
[ocaml-mli]: #ocaml-mli

A `*.mli` file should not be included for a `*.ml` file iff the `*.ml` file's automatically derived interface is identical. Many `*.ml` files in our codebase consist of only signatures and a functor. In the case of those files, there is not purpose to redefining the `*.mli` file because there is no new or restricted information in that file. If a `*.ml` file contains implementations in the root structure, then a `*.mli` file should most likely be created.

### Modules
[ocaml-modules]: #ocaml-modules

#### Prefer Standardized Shortnames

The names `t`, `T`, and `S` are common shortnames used in modules to signify specific things.

The name `t` is used to represent the root type of a module. For instance, if there is a module `Account` which contains types and values related to accounts, then `Account.t` is the type of an account. The name `t` can also be used as a value iff there is only intended to be one value of the root type of the module. As an example, if you wanted to have a single global logger in a `Logger` module, the type `Logger.t` could be the type of a logger, and the value `Logger.t` could be the global logger value of type `Logger.t`.

The module name `T` is used to encapsulate the root type and basic definitions regarding a root type of a module. It is a common practice used when you want to instantiate some functors for a module's root type and have the instantiations appear in the module itself. As an example, it is common to call the `Comparable.Make` functor in order to derive various helper values/modules from a comparable type. In this case, if we had a module `Account` again, and we wanted to derive the `Comparable.S` signature, then we would define a module `T` in `Account` which defines a root type `t` and the required functions for the `Comparable.Make` functor argument (in this case, `compare`). With this `T` module, we can then `include T` and `include Comparable.Make (T)` in the `Account` module to bring in all related values/modules for the `Account.t` type. Here is a full example of that:

```
module Account = struct
  module T = struct
    type t = ... [@@deriving compare]
  end

  include T
  include Comparable.Make (T)
end
```

The module type name `S` is used for defining the root signature of a module. This is most commonly used when you have a module which contains a functor. In this case, we typically call the functor `Make` and declare the functor returns the type `S`, putting both of these values in the same module. Looking back at our previous example, `Core_kernel`'s `Comparable` module follows this pattern: `Comparable.Make` is a functor which returns a `Comparable.S`.

#### Prefer One Type Per Module
[ocaml-modules-singleton-types]: #ocaml-modules-singleton-types

As a general rule of thumb, each module should be scoped to a single type. This pattern helps isolate concerns and, in turn, allows value names to be shorter, as they are located by context. Take, for example, a `Merkle_tree` module. This module will need a type `Merkle_tree.t` which represents the entire merkle tree (or a node of it). A `Merkle_tree` will also want to have a `path` type. It is preferable to place this `path` type into it's own nested module (`Merkle_tree.Path.t` instead of `Merkle_tree.path`). To help understand why this is preferable, imagine we did put path in `Merkle_tree.path`. Now, `Merkle_tree` contains values (functions) that relate not only to the merkle tree type itself, but also the a path of a merkle tree. For clarity, it would be natural to prepend all of the value names related to a path with `path_` (`path_map`, `path_length`, etc...). By isolating `Path` to it's own module, we can shorten these names while keep the context of values clear. Additionally, if we choose to in the future, we may encapsulate the implementation details of `Path` by applying a restrictive signature to it, which would make the separation of concerns more clear via compiler enforcement.

#### No Monkeypatching
[ocaml-modules-monkeypatching]: #ocaml-modules-monkeypatching

Monkeypatching of modules is explicity disallowed in our codebase. Monkeypatching is defined as the act of taking an existing module and redefining it with extended or modified values. More simply, it's anything of the form.

```
module A = struct
  module M = struct
    let x = ...
  end
end

module M = struct
  include A.M
  let y = ...
  (* or `let x = ...` *)
end
```

Monkeypatching may be the easiest path to getting code to compile sometimes, but in general, it creates confusion and/or technical debt in the codebase. If you need to monkeypatch a module, you should have a good reason as to why.

#### Functor Signature Equalities
[ocaml-modules-functor-patterns]: #ocaml-modules-functor-patterns

Signature `with` statements for signatures of modules generated by functors should be limited to the form `S with module M1 = M2` whenever possible. Replacement equalities `:=` should be limited to `include` statements where portions of the signature need to be limited (for example, when a nested module in the signature is already defined at the current structure scope). The form `S with type t = ...` is also not preferred as it scales poorly as the number of common dependencies between signatures involved with a functor increases. Note that this places increased importance on the janestreet styleguide rule "Prefer standard signature includes to hand-written interfaces".

#### Functor Arity
[ocaml-modules-functor-arity]: #ocaml-modules-functor-arity

Functor can have a maximum arity of 3 (arity is the number of arguments; in this case, the number of nested functors - functors returning functors). If a functor requires more than 3 modules as arguments, then the required modules should all be nested into one module. The standard pattern for this is to define a signature `Inputs_intf` for your functor, which will, in turn, define the module arguments to the functor. See below for a simple example.

```
module type Inputs_intf = sig
  module A : A.S
  module B : B.S
  module C : C.S
  module D : D.S
end

module type S = sig
  include Inputs_intf

  (* ... *)
end

module Make (Inputs : Inputs_intf)
  : S
    with module A = Inputs.A
     and module B = Inputs.B
     and module C = Inputs.C
     and module D = Inputs.D =
struct
  open Inputs

  (* ... *)
end
```

# Code Idiosyncrasies

We use a particular style of OCaml. Here's some of the important things.

<a name="parameterized-records"></a>
## Parameterized records

```ocaml
type ('payload, 'pk, 'signature) t_ =
  {payload: 'payload; sender: 'pk; signature: 'signature}
[@@deriving eq, sexp, hash]

type t = (Payload.t, Public_key.t, Signature.t) t_
[@@deriving eq, sexp, hash]

(* ... *)

type var = (Payload.var, Public_key.var, Signature.var) t_
```

We're defining a base type `t_` with type variables for all types of record fields. Then we define the record using these type variables. Finally, we instantiate the record with `type t`, this is the OCaml type. And also `type var` this is the type of this value in a SNARK circuit. We'll cover this more later. Whenever we want something to be programmable from within a SNARK circuit we define it in this manner so we can reuse the record definition across both types.

There is some talk of moving to OCaml object types to do this sort of thing so we don't need to deal with positional arguments. Perhaps I (@bkase) will write up an RFC for that at some point.

<a name="ppx_deriving"></a>
### Ppx_deriving

```ocaml
type t = int [@@deriving sexp, eq]
```

This is the first time we've seen a macro. Here we use `sexp` from [ppx_jane](https://github.com/janestreet/ppx_jane) and `eq` from [ppx_deriving](https://github.com/ocaml-ppx/ppx_deriving).


<a name="stable-v1"></a>
### Stable.V1

```ocaml
module Stable : sig
  module V1 : sig
    type t = (* ... *)
    [@@deriving bin_io, (*...*)]
  end
end
```

Whenever a type is serializable, it's important for us to maintain backwards compatibility once we have a stable release. Ideally, we wouldn't define `bin_io` on any types outside of `Stable.V1`. When we change the structure of the datatype we would create a `V2` under `Stable`.

<a name="quickcheck-gen"></a>
### Property based tests

[Core](https://opensource.janestreet.com/core/) has an implementation of [QuickCheck](https://blog.janestreet.com/quickcheck-for-core/) that we use whenever we can in unit tests. Here is an example signature for a `Quickcheck.Generator.t` of payments.

```ocaml
(* Generate a single payment between
 * $a, b \in keys$
 * for fee $\in [0,max_fee]$
 * and an amount $\in [1,max_amount]$
 *)

val gen :
     keys:Signature_keypair.t array
  -> max_amount:int
  -> max_fee:int
  -> t Quickcheck.Generator.t
```

<a name="typesafe-invariants"></a>
### Typesafe invariants (help with naming this section)

Often times in Coda, we need to perform very important checks on certain pieces of data.
For example, we need to confirm that the signature is valid on a user-command we receive over the network.
Such checks can be expensive, so we only want to do them once, but we want to remember that we've done them.

```ocaml
(* inside user_command.mli *)

module With_valid_signature : sig
  type nonrec t = private t [@@deriving sexp, eq]

  (*...*)
end

val check : t -> With_valid_signature.t option
```

Here we define `With_valid_signature` (usage will be `User_command.With_valid_signature.t`) using `type nonrec t = private t` to allow upcasting to a `User_command.t`, but prevent downcasting. The _only_ way to turn a `User_command.t` into a `User_command.With_valid_signature.t` is to `check` it. Now the compiler will catch our mistakes.

<a name="unit-tests"></a>
### Unit Tests

We use [ppx_inline_test](https://github.com/janestreet/ppx_inline_test) for unit testing. Of course whenever we can, we combine that with `QuickCheck`.

```ocaml
let%test_unit =
  Quickcheck.test ~sexp:[%sexp_of: Int.t] Int.gen
    ~f:(fun x -> assert (Int.equal (f_inv (f x)) x))
```

<a name="functors"></a>
### Functors

We are in the process of migrating to using module signature equalities -- see [the above section](#functor-signature-equalities) and [the rfc for rationale](../rfcs/0004-style-guidelines.md), but we still have a lot of code using type substitutions (`with type foo := bar`).

In [signature_lib/checked.ml](../src/lib/signature_lib/checked.ml) we have an example of a definition using type substitutions. First we define the resulting module type of the functor, keeping all types we'll be functoring in abstract.

```ocaml
module type S = sig
  type boolean_var
  type curve
  type curve_var
  (*...*)
end
```

Then we define the functor:

```ocaml
module Schnorr
  (Impl : Snark_intf.S)
  (Curve : sig (*...*) end)
  (Message : Message_intf
    with type boolean_var := Impl.Boolean.var
    (*...*))
: S with type boolean_var := Impl.Boolean.var
     and type curve := Curve.t
     and type curve_var := Curve.var
     (*...*)
= struct
  (* here we implement the signature described in S *)
end
```

<a name="snark-checked"></a>
### Custom SNARK circuit logic

This is also the first time we see custom SNARK circuit logic. A pattern we've been using is to scope all operations that you'd want to run inside a SNARK under a submodule `module Checked`.

For example, inside [sgn.mli](../src/lib/sgn/sgn.mli) we see:

```ocaml
(* ... *)
val negate : t -> t

module Checked : sig
  val negate : var -> var
end
```

`negate` is the version of the function that runs in OCaml, and `Checked.negate` is the one that runs inside of a SNARK circuit.

### Polymorphic variants

OCaml allows so-called polymorphic variants, with constructors marked with a backtick:

```ocaml
type truth = [ `True | `False ]
```

One advantage of such variants over ordinary algebraic datatypes is that they allow easy extensibility:

```ocaml
type uncertainty = [ truth | `Maybe ]
```

The constructors for polymorphic variants live in a global namespace, and they're not associated a unique defined type. One result is that the OCaml compiler can't check for exhaustive pattern-matching when using polymorphic variants. Their extensibility means both of these statements are correct:

```ocaml
let v1 : truth = `True
let v2 : uncertainty = `True
```

There's an implied subtyping that may not be desired. In general, the typing of polymorphic variants is more complex than for ordinary datatype constructors.

Unless there's need for extensibility, ordinary datatype constructors are usually preferred over polymorphic variants.
