src/app/website/jobs/protocol-engineer.markdown, before:

---
title: Protocol engineer
date: 2018-01-01
---
O(1) Labs is a small, well-funded startup aiming to develop the first cryptocurrency protocol that can deliver on the promise of supporting real-world applications and widespread use. Our team is based in San Francisco, and we are funded by top investors (including Polychain, Metastable, Max Levchin, and Naval Ravikant).

Cryptocurrency is a domain where correctness really counts. As such, a cornerstone of our approach is a focus on building reliable software through the use of statically-typed functional programming languages. This is reflected in our OCaml codebase and style of structuring code around DSLs, as well as in the design of the smart-contracts platform we're developing.

There is no need to have prior experience in cryptography, and we're hiring engineers to work on a bunch of exciting projects including:

* Our OCaml DSL for writing zk-SNARKs (a cryptographic primitive for certified computation).
* The design of a virtual machine and higher-level languages for smart contracts (there a lot of interesting challenges here since the VM has to be efficient inside SNARKs).
* Working on the core networking, cryptography, and reliability aspects of the protocol.

This is a chance to join a small, collaborative team and have a ton of independence while working on fascinating cross-disciplinary problems in computing. We also offer competitive compensation both in salary and equity as well as top-of-the-market benefits.

Ideal candidates will be interested in any of:

* Functional programming
* Programming language theory
* Security
* Distributed systems
* Cryptography
* Cryptocurrency

There are no hard requirements and we're more interested in learning about your individual background.

If you'd be interested in talking further, please get in touch by sending an email with your resume and the subject "Engineer Applicant" to [jobs@o1labs.org](mailto:jobs@o1labs.org?subject="Engineer Applicant").

We are committed to building a diverse, inclusive company. People of color, LGBTQ individuals, women, and people with disabilities are strongly encouraged to apply.

Commit message:

Career page (#1642)
* The config dune supports blacklisting; ~un for now

This makes it so those with undo-files aren't stuck after editing config
files

* Basic layout done

* Apply section is good

* added big image gallery

* Qualities section done

* Benefits section is decent

* Benefits page is more decent

* Benefits low spacing is better

* add header double-lines

* fix header margin

* Mobile version of qualities

* Looks good enough on mobile

* Duplicate job files in the two places

* copy adjustments

* Fixes to copy

* Add nbsp

* Replace dev advocate with protocol eng

* Updated job descriptions

* Fixed the font on the heading

* Added real pictures

* Requested changes

src/app/website/jobs/protocol-engineer.markdown, after:

---
title: Protocol engineer
date: 2018-01-01
---
O(1) Labs is a small, well-funded startup aiming to develop the first cryptocurrency protocol that can deliver on the promise of supporting real-world applications and widespread use. Our team is based in San Francisco, and we are funded by top investors (including Polychain, Metastable, Max Levchin, and Naval Ravikant).

We’re working on technologies with the potential to reimagine social structures. We believe it’s important to incorporate diverse perspectives from conception through realization.

We offer a competitive employee benefits package.

Cryptocurrency is a domain where correctness really counts. As such, a cornerstone of our approach is a focus on building reliable software through the use of statically-typed functional programming languages. This is reflected in our OCaml codebase and style of structuring code around DSLs, as well as in the design of the smart-contracts platform we're developing.

There is no need to have prior experience in cryptography, and we're hiring engineers to work on a bunch of exciting projects including:

* Our OCaml DSL for writing zk-SNARKs (a cryptographic primitive for certified computation).
* The design of a virtual machine and higher-level languages for smart contracts (there a lot of interesting challenges here since the VM has to be efficient inside SNARKs).
* Working on the core networking, cryptography, and reliability aspects of the protocol.

This is a chance to join a small, collaborative team and have a ton of independence while working on fascinating cross-disciplinary problems in computing. We also offer competitive compensation both in salary and equity as well as top-of-the-market benefits.

Ideal candidates will be interested in any of:

* Functional programming
* Programming language theory
* Security
* Distributed systems
* Cryptography
* Cryptocurrency

There are no hard requirements and we're more interested in learning about your individual background.

If you'd be interested in talking further, please get in touch by sending an email with your resume and the subject "Engineer Applicant" to [jobs@o1labs.org](mailto:jobs@o1labs.org?subject="Engineer Applicant").

We are committed to building a diverse, inclusive company. People of color, LGBTQ individuals, women, and people with disabilities are strongly encouraged to apply.
